---
layout: default
title: Rails developer London
subtitle: Experienced and professional. Specialising in E-Commerce, conversion optimisation, and automated SEO.
---
* "Professional Services Offered":#services
* "Why Hire Me?":#why_hire
* "Testimonials":#testimonials
* "Education":#education
* "Contact":#contact_me

h2(#services). Professional Services Offered

I am a full-stack *Rails Developer* who builds web applications such as "Oxbridge Notes":http://www.oxbridgenotes.co.uk and "Hired Help":http://www.hiredhelp.ie. I have deep experience with the Ruby and the Ruby on Rails web framework and its associated technologies: CSS, the HTTP protocol, Linux, cloud infrastructure, and Javascript.

h2(#why_hire). 10 Reasons To Hire Me

1.	I’m fast. I built and deployed one app per week for my previous client. I stay fast by keeping a deck of 6000 programming flashcards which I keep in constant rotation

2.	I specialize in Ruby on Rails, and by this I mean I’m competent in Ruby, Rails 3.1, JavaScript, coffeescript, CSS, Html, Linux, deployment with multi-server architectures, asynchronous requests, regular expressions, TDD, VIM, jQuery, refactoring, design patterns, git, and sql.

3.	My code is clean. I’ve already written the first draft of an upcoming book on Ruby on Rails best practices.

4.	I’m practical. I’m not the kind of engineer who will waste your time and money perfecting architecture till the end of your budget. I’m the guy you want to hire to rapidly prototype something at a reasonable cost so that you can go and raise money right now.

5.	I take pride in my work. I’m ashamed of bugs and I won’t let them creep into projects with my name on them.

6.	I’m aware of my own cost, and my goal as a consultant is to offer you the most value per dollar, not to bill the maximum number of hours. I will suggest technical compromises to your spec where we swap ideal functionality for cheaply implemented functionality. You can always add the ideal case when you raise your first million.

7.	I know the Facebook platform inside out. I’m equally familiar with Spree, an open source e-commerce platform allowing you to create stores that sell online – be that digital goods or otherwise.

8.	I studied at and graduated from Oxford University.

9.	I know a lot about marketing, having built viral Facebook apps, having managed Facebook and Google advertising campaigns for over 2 years, and having done heavy SEO work. I will imbue your app with sensible optimizations that will make marketing your app, and ultimately making money, much simpler.

10.	I can build your web app alone, although I prefer to work with a graphic designer since your end results will be better for the same cost. 

I have a track record of building, deploying, and maintaining web applications such as those in my "portfolio":/portfolio.html. I attend "Ruby conferences":http://scottishrubyconference.com/ and "Ruby meetups":http://rubyireland.com/. I've contributed to over fifteen "open source projects":https://github.com/jackkinsella, I "blog about Ruby":/blog.html

h2. More About What I Do

h3. Reliable, Bug Free Code

I practice TDD, which means, amongst others things, that I design my software in a way that it can automatically verify itself following every release. This means you won't have to hire a tester to manually run through every page in a browser. Although TDD takes more time than conventional coding, the safeguards against bugs make it the coding practice of choice for those who demand high quality stable software, such as LinkedIn, Facebook, Google,and 37Signals.

h3. Open Source Technology

I'm familiar with the key open-source libraries in Ruby/Rails, and I use these in place of writing custom code. Less custom code means I spend less time building your application and you receive a smaller bill for my services.

h3. Advice on Commerial Considerations

A web programmer's job isn't just to program; his job is also to advise on technical considerations and online business. 

Drawing from my experience seeing projects grow from napkin scribbles to unmanned money-making machines, I try to point out key features that you may be omitting, and, equally, expensive but pointless functionality you might want to include. I'm one of the only Rails developers in London who offers this service. Here is a small sample of the issues on which I will advise:

* *SEO strategy*: By far the cheapest traffic comes through high ranks in organic search. Through years of experimentation I've found a technique to increase organic traffic dramatically, three-fold in the most recent case. I will help you build SEO into the core of your application. Having the greatest web app on the net means nothing if no-one ever finds it.

* *Tracking Key Performance Indicators*: The three big advantages of doing business online are automation of repetitive tasks, low overheads, and *the ability to track and analyse data*. By monitoring KPIs such as sign ups, uploads, sales in a particular category and time spent on individual pages, you can make informed decisions about your business, leading to a competitive edge.  I'll advise you on how to integrate tracking at every level of your application, and display the data in a summary form you can easily digest.

* *Backup Solutions*: Losing your customer's data will ruin your business's reputation and may even force you to shut down your business. I'll discuss and implement an appropriate backup solution for your application. 

* *Security Against Hacking*: Hacked accounts and leaked personal details will cost your business dearly. I use the latest security best practices to prevent common hacks, such as SQL injection, Cross-Site-Forgery, Cross-Site-Scripting and Mass Assignment overrides.

h2(#testimonials). What Other People Have Said About Me

bq. "Insanely committed to learning and developing his skills; helped to architect a social networking site driven by his passion for understanding people and the way they think. Not to mention his dizzying energy and work ethic. Work for him, work with him, get him to work for you -really can't go wrong, one in 6 billion."
??Amaru Villanueva Rance, Innovation Analyst, "giffgaff":http://giffgaff.com/??

bq. "Jack is an innovative and dedicated professional with strong drive and energy. He has a keen eye for commercial opportunities and is honing his skills by developing new business models that exploit emerging technologies and services. Jack is worth meeting, and he will add value to a business idea."
??Sheila Doyle, Chief Information Officer, "British Petroleum":http://www.bp.com??

bq. "Jack is extremely professional and extremely familiar with the latest internet technologies to date...There are absolutely no management issues when working with Jack"
??Chee Yeo, Founder, "29 Steps":http://29steps.co.uk/??

bq. "Ever since hiring Jack to do our internet marketing we've never been busier -- despite the recession."
??Frank Kinsella (Related), "Western Laser Clinic":http://www.westernlaserclinic.ie??

h2(#education). Education

Graduate 2009 at "Oxford":http://www.ox.ac.uk/. 

I scored one of the highest results in Ireland in the Leaving Certificate, earning As in math, physics, chemistry, biology, English and French. 

I speak fluent Spanish, having lived in Spain and worked in Bolivia.
